Narration (Dana Terrace): Exterior, Boiling Isles. In the woods near the Owl House, Luz has placed a myriad of magical objects, and paces while reading Philip’s journal, trying to open a portal to Earth. Eda “supervises”, which means drinking a lot of apple blood.

Luz: Okay. Attempt number twenty-three. [To Eda] Thanks again for agreeing to help, Eda.

Eda: Ah, don’t mention it, Kiddo. But if you wanted me to help, you should have mentioned something two apple bloods ago.

Narration (Dana Terrace): Luz puts a hand on Eda's shoulder, eyes shining with adoration.

Luz: Your very presence is help enough.

Narration (Dana Terrace): But she stares for a little too long.

Eda: Cute, but creepy… like Hooty when he was a kitten.

Luz: Wait, Hooty was—

Eda: [Cutting Luz off] So, what do we got here?

Luz: A spell that has a very slim chance of working. But, if it does, it might get me back to the Human Realm.

Eda: Well, hot Titan toes! What’re we waiting for? Pull the trigger.

Luz: We have to be very careful. This spell is unstable and—Eda!

Narration (Dana Terrace): Eda has already activated the spell.

Eda: Again, probably should have mentioned something two apple bloods ago.

Luz: Oh, shoot!

Narration (Dana Terrace): Kablooey! A rift between time and space. Before a dazed Eda and Luz swirls a shining portal to…

Narration (Matt Braly): Exterior, Amphibia. Deep in Wartwood Swamp, the Plantar family and Anne are hunting for ingredients.

Hop Pop: Wait till you kids this Swamp Soufflé. It only tastes slightly worse than it smells.

[Anne, Sprig, and Polly all groan in unison.]

Anne: I still think we should have ordered takeout fromStumpy's.

Sprig: They do Grub Satay now!

Polly: So, what else do we need for this suffering?

Hop Pop: Uh, Soufflé.

Polly: I said what I said.

Sprig: Well, according to the recipe, we need something called pineapple… fungus?

Narration (Matt Braly): Polly runs over to an odd looking mushroom and yanks it out of the ground with all her might.

Polly: [Shouting] Is this it?

Narration (Matt Braly): The ground starts to shake. Polly has actually pulled the nose of a gigantic, horrifying creature! A giant ugly badger with insect eyes and mandibles explodes from the ground, and looms over the characters!

Anne, Sprig, & Hop Pop: [In unison] Dang it, Polly.

Polly: In retrospect, I should have asked, and then pulled.

Narration (Matt Braly): The Badger-Beetle roars, and they run away screaming.

Anne, Sprig, Polly, & Hop Pop: Aaaaah!

Narration (Matt Braly): Exterior, Wartwood Swamp. Some ways away, Eda and Luz step through the glowing portal and gaze around.

Eda: Luz, it worked! We're in the Human Realm.

Narration (Matt Braly): Eda bows deeply to a passing grubhog.

Eda: M'lady.

Luz: I worry what you think you know about humans.

Eda: Well, might as well head to the nearest town and see if they have any S&P approved bug equivalent to liquor.

Luz: Hold on, Eda. Do you hear that?

Narration (Matt Braly): Suddenly, Anne, Hop Pop, Polly, and Sprig come tearing out of the woods. Anne stumbles into Luz, and they both fall over.

Luz & Anne: [Simultaneously, while falling] Aaaah!

Hop Pop: Whoa! Who are you people!?

Sprig: I don’t believe it! Another Anne?

Polly: And she’s better dressed too.

Eda: Woah! Uh, giant frog-people… either that, or this is the best apple blood I've ever had. [to Luz] Kid, are you seeing this too?

Narration (Matt Braly): Anne helps Luz up. The two regard one another with awe.

Anne: Another human? I don’t believe this!

Luz: Me neither. I'm Luz Noceda, and I am very impressed that you're walking around with one shoe.

Anne: Eh, It took some getting used to. I'm Anne, by the way, Anne Boonchuy.

Luz: Why do I get the feeling we have a lot in common?

Anne: I dunno, but I can already tell we're gonna be besties.

Narration (Matt Braly): Eda leans over.

Eda: Uh, sorry to interrupt, but [shouting] we've got company!

Narration (Matt Braly): The Badger-Beetle burst into the clearing, roaring with rage. Hop Pop attaches himself to Eda's leg.

Hop Pop: Save us, foxy lady!

Eda: Get off of me.

Narration (Matt Braly): Luz steps forward, pulling some glyphs out of her pocket.

Luz: Leave this one to me, guys.

Narration (Matt Braly): She slams a glyph down on the ground, growing vines which shoot out and ensnare the beast.

Anne & Sprig: Woah, cool!

Polly: [In unison with Anne and Sprig] Wow, cool!

Sprig: Anne, Polly, let's help too!

Anne: Good thinking, bud.

Narration (Matt Braly): With the badger tied up in magic vine, Anne, Sprig, and Polly all rush forward. Anne draws her racked and hits the badger in the leg.

Anne: Taaake this!

[The badger growls.]

Narration (Matt Braly): Sprig loads Polly into his slingshot, and fires her at the badger.

Sprig: Little sister cannon, fire!

Polly: Here comes the pain!

Narration (Matt Braly): Pow! Polly hits the badger right in the eye. It whimpers and limps off into the woods, defeated. All the kids—Luz, Anne, Polly, and Sprig—stand tall, and look like total bosses. Eda and Hop Pop exchange a glance.

Eda: Uh… I was about to help.

Hop Pop: [Fake coughing] Ditto.

Narration (Matt Braly): Anne sheaths her racket and rushes up to Luz.

Anne: Wow! You're like a… magician, or something. It's incredible!

Luz: I'm a witch—well, kind of a witch-in-training… But, I come from the human world originally.

Sprig: A witch? I know a certain curse-wielding frog-girl who would love to meet you.

Polly: So, what're you doing here, better-dressed-Anne?

Hop Pop: Polly, rude much?

Eda: Oh! I love the chaotic energy coming from the tiny one. Up top, you absolute beast.

Narration (Matt Braly): Eda and Polly high-five.

Luz: Actually, searching for a way home.

Anne: Don't tell me. You're trapped in a medieval fantasy adventure rigamarole too?

Luz: Mmh, less of a medieval fantasy, and more of a kid-friendly hellscape on top of a giant carcass, but… yep!

Narration (Matt Braly): Anne grabs Luz's hands.

Anne: Oh my god! I have so many questions for you. How are you coping? Do you miss your parents? How was the food there?

Luz: And I got questions for you. Where’d you learn how to fight like that? Do you have a found family too? Or a horrifying authority figure to fight?

Anne: [Gasp] You have to come over! Hop Pop, can we have a sleepover, like, right now?

Hop Pop: Uh, I-I-I don’t know Anne. We need to get permission from, uh… [to Eda] eh, what did you say your name was?

Eda: I am Eda, the Owl Lady. The most powerful witch on the Boiling Isles… until recently. But you can call me Eda, you weird little frog-man.

Narration (Matt Braly): Eda winks. Hop Pop blushes, hotter than the surface of the sun.

Hop Pop: Oh! Hehe, weeell I, ah… hehehe… I, ah, um… oh, hehehe, I… goodness… weh, well… huh…

Narration (Matt Braly): Sprig notices the portal beginning to flicker and waiver.

Sprig: Uh, Luz, Eda? Is your portal supposed to do that?

Luz: [Gasps] Oh-no! We’re out of time! [To Eda] I told you this thing would be unstable! [To Anne] I’m sorry Anne, we’ve got to go!

Anne: No! Luz, don’t you dare go!

Narration (Matt Braly): They clasp hands again, both tearing up.

Luz: In another life, Anne, we'll have that sleepover. In another life!

Anne: Like, some kind of… I don’t know… alternate universe?

Narration (Matt Braly): Luz nods tearfully. Eda grabs Luz by the shoulders and drags her into the portal.

Eda: Sorry kiddo, but I ain't about to get stuck in a world of frogs. Demon Realm, here we come!

Anne: Sure enough. Get out of here, you crazy kids! And Luz…

Narration (Matt Braly): Luz turns back one last time.

Anne: …never give up. You can do it. We're both gonna find a way home. I just know it.

Luz: You got that right. Take care Anne… I love your hair!

Narration (Matt Braly): Kablaoey! The portal collapses with an energy shockwave. The Plantars and Anne are left dumbfounded.

Anne: I don’t believe it. A human girl stuck far from home in another world, just like me!

Sprig: Two kindred souls!

Polly: What are the odds?

Hop Pop: [Sighs] Well, looks like the Swamp Soufflé is a bust. Guess we’ll head back and see if Stumpy’s is still open.

Narration (Matt Braly): We pan to the treeline. In the distance we hear Hop Pop one more time.

Hop Pop: Hey, have any of you seen my wallet?

Narration (Dana Terrace): Exterior, Boiling Isles. Luz and Eda stand where the portal once was.

Eda: Well, [sighs] that was something. What do you say we go find King and figure out dinner?

Luz: Another human girl, and I barely got to talk to her! I didn’t even get a memento to remember her by.

Eda: Oh, I wouldn't say that… [Eda pulls out Hop Pop’s wallet.]

Luz: Eda! Did you steal that poor frog-man's wallet!?

Eda: Well I couldn't help it. He was right there!

Luz: Quick! We gotta open the portal and return it!

Eda: Maybe another day, Luz. Maybe another day.

Narration (Dana Terrace): Meanwhile, just nearby the Owl House, Amity paces in front of Tiny Nose.

Amity: I'm gonna do it. I'm gonna talk to her. [She clears her throat] Hey, Luz. Remember that kiss thing? Well, I don't! [Laughs nervously] We can just, go back to normal, right? Hey, do you wanna help me study for uh, ts… Titan, I forgot what kind of magic I use.

Tiny Nose: You look nauseous.

Amity: I am, but I shouldn't be. I faced a slitherbeast before, and I barely broke a sweat. Now look at me!

Narration (Dana Terrace): Amity lifts up her arms, revealing very sweat-stained armpits on her shirt.

Amity: [Sigh] No, I'm Amity Blight. I can do this. I’m gonna walk right up to Luz, and say—

Tiny Nose: Oh, there she is.

Narration (Dana Terrace): Reveal: Luz and Eda walking back from their trip in the distance.

Amity: I gotta go!

Narration (Dana Terrace): Amity dashes back into the woods before Luz knew she was even there.